Document vcpkg_make_configure/install (#388)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/maintainers/functions/vcpkg_make_configure.md

---
title: vcpkg_make_configure
description: Use vcpkg_make_configure to configure a Make-based project.
ms.date: 01/30/2024
---
# vcpkg_make_configure

Configure a Make-based project.

## Usage
        
```cmake
vcpkg_make_configure(
    SOURCE_PATH <source-path>
    [AUTOCONFIG]
    [COPY_SOURCE]
    [DISABLE_MSVC_WRAPPERS]
    [DISABLE_CPPFLAGS]
    [DISABLE_DEFAULT_OPTIONS]
    [DISABLE_MSVC_FLAG_ESCAPING]
    [OPTIONS <configure-setting>...]
    [OPTIONS_RELEASE <configure-setting>...]
    [OPTIONS_DEBUG <configure-setting>...]
    [PRE_CONFIGURE_CMAKE_COMMANDS <cmake-command>...]
    [LANGUAGES <language>...]
)
```

To use this function, you must depend on the helper port `vcpkg-make`:

```json
"dependencies": [
  {
    "name": "vcpkg-make",
    "host": true
  }
]
```

## Parameters

### SOURCE_PATH

The directory containing the project's source files.

This value is usually obtained as a result of calling a source acquisition command like [`vcpkg_from_github()`](vcpkg_from_github.md).

### AUTOCONFIG

> Runs autoreconf when set.

Reviewer: Nit: Maybe it should be AUTORECONF instead? Not worth it if that would create serious upgrade pain.

Reviewer 2: I'm in favor of the change,
FTR some packages prefer other methods (`bootstrap.sh`) for similar purposes.
FTR in the past, the keyword had the side effect of an implicit `DETERMINE_BUILD_TRIPLETS` which is hopefully removed here.

> Runs autoreconf when set.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Runs `autoreconf` when set.
```

### COPY_SOURCE

> If specified, the source directory will be copied to the build directory before the configuration process begins. Useful for projects that modify the source tree during configuration or build.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If specified, the source directory is copied to the build directory before the configuration process begins. Useful for projects that modify the source tree during configuration or build.
```

### DISABLE_MSVC_WRAPPERS

By default, `vcpkg_make_configure` supplies wrappers that translate and reorder 'Unix / GCC-style' flags into 'MSVC-style' flags. This accommodates build systems that assume Unix or GCC conventions.

Setting `DISABLE_MSVC_WRAPPERS` disables translation of flags, allowing tools like `cl` and `windres` to receive command-line flags without modifications.

### DISABLE_MSVC_FLAG_ESCAPING

> By default, escape characters (e.g., -Xcompiler, -Xlinker) are added before compiler and linker flags when using MSVC. These escape characters are intended for use by the wrappers and libtool to protect flags that might contain spaces, quotes, or other special characters from being misinterpreted. Setting `DISABLE_MSVC_FLAG_ESCAPING` disables this behavior. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, escape characters (e.g., -Xcompiler, -Xlinker) are added before compiler and linker flags when using MSVC. These escape characters are used by wrappers and `libtool` to protect flags that might contain spaces, quotes, or other special characters from being misinterpreted. Setting `DISABLE_MSVC_FLAG_ESCAPING` disables this behavior. 
```

  - `--bindir=${prefix}/../tools/${PORT}${path_suffix_DEBUG}/bin`
  - `--sbindir=${prefix}/../tools/${PORT}${path_suffix_DEBUG}/sbin`
  - `--libdir=${prefix}/lib`
  - `--includedir=${prefix}/../include`
  - `--mandir=${prefix}/share/${PORT}`
  - `--docdir=${prefix}/share/${PORT}`
  - `--datarootdir=${prefix}/share/${PORT}`

Platform-Specific Tweaks:
* On Windows
  - Sets `gl_cv_double_slash_root=yes` to signal to the configure script that it is running on Windows, where paths can begin with double slashes (//).
  - Sets `ac_cv_func_memmove=yes` and `ac_cv_func_memset=yes` to indicate that the `memmove` and `memset` functions are available.
  - sets `gl_cv_host_cpu_c_abi=no` on ARM64 builds to indicate that the compiler does not use the standard C ABI for floating-point numbers.

* On Unix-like systems:
  - Adjusts paths to match the typical Unix filesystem hierarchy (e.g., using /usr/local).

>[!NOTE]
> These default options streamline the configuration process for most projects. If you need a highly customized build, you can set `DISABLE_DEFAULT_OPTIONS` and manually provide all the necessary configuration options.

### OPTIONS

> Additional options to pass to the configure script. Use these to specify any custom flags or settings required by the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additional options to pass to the configure script regardless of the configuration type (debug or release). Use these to specify any custom flags or settings required by the project.
```

### OPTIONS_RELEASE

> Additional options to pass to the configure script. Use these to specify any custom flags or settings required by the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additional options to pass to the configure script only during a release build. Use these to specify any custom flags or settings required by the project.
```

These are in addition to `OPTIONS`.

### OPTIONS_DEBUG

> Additional options to pass to the configure script. Use these to specify any custom flags or settings required by the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additional options to pass to the configure script only during a debug build. Use these to specify any custom flags or settings required by the project.
```

These are in addition to `OPTIONS`.

### PRE_CONFIGURE_CMAKE_COMMANDS

> Specifies a list of CMake commands to execute before the configure process for each build type. That is, if `VCPKG_BUILD_TYPE` is empty (the default), these commands will run once for debug and once for release. If `VCPKG_BUILD_TYPE` is `release`, these commands will only be once for release. This can be used to set up the environment or prepare the build in a way that the configure script requires.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifies a list of CMake commands to execute before the configure process for each build type. That is, if `VCPKG_BUILD_TYPE` is empty (the default), these commands are run once for debug and once for release. If `VCPKG_BUILD_TYPE` is `release`, these commands are only run once for release. This can be used to set up the environment or prepare the build in a way that the configure script requires.
```

>[!NOTE]

> > When the `COPY_SOURCE` option is not set, the CMake commands in `PRE_CONFIGURE_CMAKE_COMMANDS` will operate directly on the files in the original source directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> When the `COPY_SOURCE` option is not set, the CMake commands in `PRE_CONFIGURE_CMAKE_COMMANDS` operate directly on the files in the original source directory.
```

Example

```cmake
function(my_preconfigure_command SRC BUILD_TYPE)
    # Each source directory gets different version.txt files
    if(BUILD_TYPE STREQUAL "release")
        file(WRITE "${SRC}/version.txt" "This is a release version!")
    else()
        file(WRITE "${SRC}/version.txt" "This is a debug version!")
    endif()
    # The environment variable has different values for each configuration
    set(ENV{SPECIAL} "${BUILD_TYPE} is magic")
endfunction()

vcpkg_make_configure(
    # ...
    PRE_CONFIGURE_CMAKE_COMMANDS my_preconfigure_command
)
```

> In this example, `my_preconfigure_command` will be executed twice (for "Debug" and "Release" if `VCPKG_BUILD_TYPE` is not set):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, `my_preconfigure_command` are executed twice (for "Debug" and "Release" if `VCPKG_BUILD_TYPE` is not set):
```

> Debug build: It will create `version.txt` with the content "This is a debug version!" and set the environment variable `SPECIAL` to "Debug is magic."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Debug build: Creates `version.txt` with the content "This is a debug version!" and sets the environment variable `SPECIAL` to "Debug is magic."
```

> Release build: It will create `version.txt` with the content "This is a release version!" and set the environment variable `SPECIAL` to "Release is magic."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Release build: Creates `version.txt` with the content "This is a release version!" and sets the environment variable `SPECIAL` to "Release is magic."
```
